hv: introduce SR-IOV feature for ACRN (#4482)
projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor: doc/developer-guides/hld/sriov-hld.rst

SR-IOV Virtualization High-Level Design
=======================================

> SR-IOV(single root input/output virtualization) can isolate PCIe devices

Author: OK, I will fix it.

and make the devices to have good performance, close to bare-metal. The
SR-IOV consists of two basic units, one is called PF(Physical Function)
that supports SR-IOV PCIe extended capability and manages entire
physical device, another is called VF (Virtual Function) and is a
"lightweight" PCIe function which is meant to be given to a VM as a

> pass-through device.

Reviewer: Can we also use this with pre-launched User VMs?

Regardless of the answer, I think it would be good to add a note about this. :-)

> For more details, please refer to PCIe Base Specification r4.0 Chapter

Author: r4.0 means Reversion 4.0, I will update it with "PCI Express® Base Specification Revision 4.0, Version 1.0"

For the spec download link, if you search "PCI Express® Base Specification Revision 4.0, Version 1.0", you can find it. I will place PCIE main home link, the spec needs to register before download it.

   enumeration phase.

2. Hypervisor intercepts the PF’s SR-IOV capability accessing to
   enable/disable VF devices based on *VF\_ENABLE* state, and all
   read/write requests for PF device are passthrough to PF physical
   device.

3. Hypervisor waits for 100ms after *VF\_ENABLE* is set and initialize
   VF devices. The differences between normal passthrough device and
   SR-IOV VF device are physical device detection, BARs and MSIx
   initializations. Hypervisor uses *Subsystem Vendor ID* to detect
   SR-IOV VF physical device instead *Vendor ID* since there is no valid
   *Vendor ID* for SR-IOV VF physical device, the VF BARs are
   initialized by its associated PF’s SR-IOV capabilities not PCI
   standard BAR registers, MSIx mapping base address is also from PF’s
   SR-IOV capabilities not PCI standard BAR registers.

SR-IOV Passthrough VF Architecture In ACRN
------------------------------------------

.. figure:: images/sriov-image4.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: SR-IOV-vf-passthrough

   SR-IOV VF Passthrough Architecture In ACRN

1. The SR-IOV VF device needs to bind PCI-stud driver instead
   vendor-specific VF driver before passthrough the device.

> 2. User configures acrn-dm boot parameter with passthrough SR-IOV VF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. User configures ``acrn-dm`` boot parameter with passthrough SR-IOV VF
```

Author: Thanks, I will fix this

>    device. When UOS starts, acrn-dm invokes a hypercall to set the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   device. When User VM starts, ``acrn-dm`` invokes a hypercall to set the
```

Author: Thanks, I will fix it

   *vdev-VF0* device in UOS.

3. Hypervisor emulates *Device ID/Vendor ID* and *Memory Space Enable
   (MSE*) in configuration space for an assigned SR-IOV VF device. The
   assigned VF *Device ID* comes from its associated PF’s capability,
   *Vendor ID* is same with PF’s *Vendor ID* and *MSE* is always set
   when reading the SR-IOV VF device *CONTROL* register

4. Vendor-specific VF driver in target VM probes the assigned SR-IOV VF
   device.

SR-IOV Initialization Flow
--------------------------

.. figure:: images/sriov-image5.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: SR-IOV-init-flow

   SR-IOV Initialization Flow

When a SR-IOV capable device is initialized, all access to the
configuration space will pass through to the physical device directly.

> SOS can identify all capabilities of the device from SR-IOV extended

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service VM can identify all capabilities of the device from SR-IOV extended
```

Author: OK, I will replace SOS with Service VM

> capability then create sysfs node for SR-IOV management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
capability then create ``sysfs`` node for SR-IOV management.
```

SR-IOV VF Enable Flow
---------------------

.. figure:: images/sriov-image6.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: SR-IOV-enable-flow

   SR-IOV VF Enable Flow

> Application enables n VF devices via a SR-IOV PF device *sysfs* node.

Reviewer: What application are we talking about here? ``acrn-dm``, launch script, something else?

Hypervisor intercepts all SR-IOV capability accesses and check
*VF\_ENABLE* state, if the *VF\_ENABLE* is set, hypervisor creates n
virtual devices after 100ms that VF physical devices have enough time to
be created. SOS waits 100ms then only accesses the first VF device’s
configuration space including *Class Code, Reversion ID, Subsystem

> Vendor ID, Subsystem ID,* SOS uses the first VF device information to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vendor ID, Subsystem ID,* Service VM uses the first VF device information to
```

initialize subsequent VF devices.

SR-IOV VF Disable Flow
----------------------

.. figure:: images/sriov-image7.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: SR-IOV-disable-flow

   SR-IOV VF Disable Flow

> Application disables SR-IOV VF devices by writing zero to SR-IOV PF

Reviewer: Same question, what application are we talking about here?

device *sysfs* node. Hypervisor intercepts all SR-IOV capability
accesses and check *VF\_ENABLE* state, if *VF\_ENABLE* is clear,

> hypervisor makes VF virtual devices invisible from SOS that all accesses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hypervisor makes VF virtual devices invisible from Service VM that all accesses
```

Reviewer: What happens to the VF devices that have been passed-through to User VMs? (and is there any difference between RTVM and "normal" User VM)?

> for VF will return 0xFFFFFFFF as an error, VF physical devices are

Reviewer: What do you mean by "VF physical devices"?

removed within 1s of *VF\_ENABLE* is clear.

SR-IOV VF Assignment Policy
---------------------------

.. figure:: images/sriov-image8.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: SR-IOV-vf-assignment

   SR-IOV VF Assignment

> 1. All SR-IOV PF devices are managed by SOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. All SR-IOV PF devices are managed by Service VM.
```

> 2. Currently, SR-IOV PF can’t passthrough to UOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Currently, SR-IOV PF can’t passthrough to User VM.
```

> 3. All VFs can be passthrough to UOS, but we do not recommend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. All VFs can be passthrough to User VM, but we do not recommend
```

>    passthrough to high privilege VMs, because PF device may impact

Reviewer: What is the definition of a "high privilege VM", can we add some text that explains it better?

   assigned VFs including functionality and stability.

SR-IOV Usage Guide In ACRN
--------------------------

We use Intel 82576 NIC as an example in here and only support LaaG

> (Linux as a Guest).

Reviewer: Do we only support Linux in general, or is this just in the example that we only cover Linux (as a User VM OS)?

> 1. Please ensure the 82576 PF and VF drivers are compiled into SOS

Reviewer: I'm going to stop here making the following changes:
* SOS -> Service VM
* UOS -> User VM
Can you change those throughout the document?

Author: Sure

   Kernel and VF driver is compiled into UOS Kernel (Set *CONFIG\_IGB=y*

>    and *CONFIG\_IGBVF=y* in Kernel Config)

Reviewer: Is this the case for our kernels by default?

Author: OK, I will enable it in ACRN kernel and I will update statements in here, only warn the user that CONFIG_IGBVF driver must be enabled in User VM Kernel.

2. When the SOS boot up, “\ *lspci -v*\ ” command can show Intel 82576

>    NIC devices have SR-IOV capability and their PF drivers are igb.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   NIC devices have SR-IOV capability and their PF drivers are ``igb``.
```

Do we always have multiple NIC devices visible?

Author: Thanks, I will fix it

.. figure:: images/sriov-image9.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: 82576-pf

   82576 SR-IOV PF devices

> 1. Input “\ *echo n > /sys/class/net/enp109s0f0/device/sriov\_numvfs*\ ”

Reviewer: Let's use the typical double-backquotes here for commands/scripts.

Author: Sure, I will fix it

   *n = 2* for the example.

.. figure:: images/sriov-image10.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: 82576-vf

   82576 SR-IOV VF devices

.. figure:: images/sriov-image11.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: 82576-vf-nic

   82576 SR-IOV VF NIC

1. Passthrough a SR-IOV VF device to guest

   a. Unbind igbvf driver in SOS

      i.   *modprobe pci\_stub*

      ii.  *echo "8086 10ca" > /sys/bus/pci/drivers/pci-stub/new\_id*

      iii. *echo "0000:6d:10.0" >
           /sys/bus/pci/devices/0000:6d:10.0/driver/unbind*

      iv.  *echo "0000:6d:10.0" >
           /sys/bus/pci/drivers/pci-stub/bind*

   b. Add SR-IOV VF device parameter (“*-s X, passthru,6d/10/0*\ ”) in
      launch UOS script

.. figure:: images/sriov-image12.png
   :align: center
   :width: 900px
   :name: 82576-nic-passthru

   Configure 82576 NIC as Passthrough Device

a. Boot UOS

SR-IOV Limitations In ACRN
--------------------------

1. The SR-IOV migration feature is not supported.

2. If the number of a PF device and all its VF devices exceeds the
   maximum number of devices supported by the platform, the PF device

>    will not be dropped.

Reviewer: I don't quite understand this statement (and it's implications). Can you expand?

Author: Update it as below.

   If one SR-IOV PF device is detected during enumeration phase, but there is no
   enough room for its total VF devices, the PF device will be dropped. The platform
   uses *MAX_PCI_DEV_NUM* ACRN configuration to support the maximum number of PCI
   devices, please make sure *MAX_PCI_DEV_NUM* is more than the number of all PCI
   devices including total SR-IOV VF devices.
